==========================================================
Academic Career Track: Loopbaan Committee Vision Statement
==========================================================

:author: Jason K. Moore
:date: October 31, 2023
:geometry: margin=25mm
:colorlinks: true

..
   Vision document with regard to own field of research (and role and position
   internationally), education, valorisation and role as the leader of his/her
   own research group. In this document the Tenure Tracker describes his/her
   most significant contributions to science and possible future cooperations
   (3 to 4 pages in length, in English);

Introduction
============

I joined Delft University of Technology as an assistant professor on August 1,
2020 following five years as an Assistant Professor of Teaching at the
University of California, Davis (UCD). I came to TU Delft (TUD) to pursue my
dream of researching bicycle engineering and teaching dynamics. Due to The
Netherland's unique appreciation for bicycling and TU Delft students being
known as the fietsenmakers, this may be the only place in the world where this
could come true. The joy of engineering and my love of one of humankind's most
elegant and important machines drives me. I desire to pass that feeling on to
my students and colleagues through my education, research, and service
activities.

Research
========

Societies around the globe must vastly increase bicycle use to reduce
transportation energy usage, reduce pollution and global warming, improve the
health of society, and increase happiness. The Netherlands leads all other
countries by a large margin in bicycle transportation mode share (27%). Yet we
are also a heavily car dependent nation with no growth in bicycle mode share
for decades. Most other countries have dismal bicycle use and developing
countries are following in the wrong footsteps of North America and Europe with
growing automobile use. Even though the bicycle is the most energy efficient
mode of human transport, most trips under 15 km, which are distances accessible
by bicycle, are still made by car. Stated simply, these car trips have to be
changed to bicycle trips for our best transportation future. I intend to play a
role in this transformation through advancing bicycle engineering.

Despite the dominance in automobile use, bicycle transportation research has
skyrocketed in the last 20 years and TU Delft has the world's only significant
and well supported `bicycle engineering laboratory`_, which I now lead. My
vision is to make significant contributions to the wider adoption of bicycling
around the world by understanding how people interact with the bicycle and the
transportation environment. My mechanical and biomechanical foundation begins
with understanding of the bicycle-rider dynamic system, which I categorize into
four fundamental research areas: 1) vehicle dynamics, 2) rider biomechanics, 3)
rider neuromuscular control, and 4) bicycle-rider behavior.

.. _bicycle engineering laboratory: https://mechmotum.github.io


I have developed a number of unique bicycle-rider dynamics models. I will
combine these models with my rider control identification techniques to further
define the essential neuromuscular control sensor-actuation pathways. With
these physics-based data driven models I will be able to predict the
bicyclist's behavior in safety and performance critical transportation
scenarios. The insights will allow us to design the vehicle with desired
dynamics, make it adapt to the rider through assistive robotics, and to help
shape our transportation infrastructure to complement and interact with the
bicycle of the future.

As far as I know, I am the only researcher that is approaching the innovations
in bicycling from this merger of vehicle dynamics and rider biomechanical
control. I believe it will produce unique and valuable insights for vehicle
designers, infrastructure designers, urban planners, and those that study human
traffic behavior. These insights will help us create a future where we
drastically increase bicycle use around the globe.

..
   Add something about being an American in the Netherlands and perspective?

My Contributions to Science
===========================

My most significant contribution to science has been the development of the
theory and experimental validation of a control model for balancing and
directing a bicycle that represents the essential neuromuscular feedback
mechanisms used by the human rider. My most cited first-author paper,
[Moore2011]_, used a data driven approach to identify the essential motions
that contribute to bicycle balance. In [Hess2012]_, we followed that work by
introducing a simple, yet robust, theoretic human control model with only seven
parameters that describes the essential proprioceptive, vestibular, and visual
feedback loops used in balancing and directing a bicycle. Then in my PhD
dissertation [Moore2012]_, I developed experimental and data analytic
approaches that validated this model from data derived from carefully designed
first-of-its-kind perturbation experiments. Also importantly, we developed the
first theoretic single track vehicle handling quality metric derived from our
control model and demonstrated its ability to differentiate between vehicle
dynamics of different bicycle designs using only a single characteristic number
([Hess2012]_, [Moore2016]_). The broad set of experimental and theoretical work
that I present in my dissertation has been widely cited (75 citations) in the
field where the best papers have between 100-200 citations, with a very small
number reaching up to 500 citations.

During my postdoctoral research, I applied similar but new methods to identify
human control in standing and walking. I wrote the first "data paper" in the
field of biomechanics [Moore2015]_. It became my second most cited first author
paper and provides an elaborate reusable dataset for walking studies which has
been widely reused. This triggered numerous biomechanics data papers in the
subsequent years by other authors. For the standing and walking control
identification problem, I developed software [Moore2018]_ for extremely
efficient trajectory optimization and parameter identification optimal control
problems using collocation methods and demonstrated closed loop identification
of standing with the technique [Moore2015a]_.

During my Assistant Professorship of Teaching in my education research, I
integrated interactive textbooks tools into LibreTexts as a Co-PI on a large US
Department of Education grant of $5M. LibreTexts is likely the most visited
open access textbook website in the world and over ten textbooks at
universities around the USA use the interactive features we developed. In my
engineering research, I worked on optimal design for safety of ski jumps,
predicting rowing performance with limited kinematic data, and developing
bicycle dynamics design methods using global optimization techniques all with
undergraduate research teams.

For close to 15 years, alongside my primary research work, I have been a core
developer of SymPy_, an open source computer algebra system, where I have
co-developed and maintain the classical mechanics, continuum mechanics,
control, and code generation sub-packages. SymPy is broadly used in a wide
range of scientific research disciplines, in education, and in industry.
Estimates of more than 1M users are not unfounded. Our 2017 paper [Meurer2017]_
describing the software has been cited over 1300 times. My work developing and
stewarding the development of SymPy, may actually be my most impactful
contribution due to the broad use of the software.

.. _SymPy: https://www.sympy.org

In the three years at TU Delft as an assistant professor, I have revived the
research started in my PhD and postdoctoral research. Our most significant
results are tied to the development of a balance-assist bicycle. We have shown
that a steering motor programmed to recover as a human would can reduce
undesired motions in elderly bicycling [Alizadehsaravi2023]_. We have also
further developed my bicycle-rider models, reviving and extending them with
full body muscle driven actuators, and demonstrated we can solve complex
human-machine optimal control problems [Steinstra2023]_. We have begun making
my bicycle-rider models useful for sports and transportation research. One
exciting development is the introduction of a realistic bicycle-rider model
into traffic micro simulation [Schmidt2023]_ which we will make available for
practitioners through the widely used SUMO simulation tool in the coming year.

All of this leads into my current and future work that is focused on refining
and expanding our understanding of human-machine control of the bicycle-rider
system and using these findings to improve performance and safety in sports,
improve transportation systems, and applying technological innovations in
bicycle design.

Valorization
============

I want to see TU Delft become the world's hub for bicycle engineering research
and for us to broadly support society's needs for innovations in bicycle
technology. In my brief time here, I have worked to establish and engage a
growing network of bicycle interested industry partners. I currently work in
close partnership with Royal Dutch Gazelle, Team DSM, and Bosch eBike Systems
as part of an NWO Perspectief grant and have been developing relationships with
SWOV, TeamNL (BMX), Tacx by Garmin, Specialized, Trek, Brompton, and Shimano. I
hosted the `2023 Bicycle and Motorcycle Dynamics Conference`_ in Delft which
brought together an international community of experts in academia and industry
to initiate connections needed to make us this hub. Approximately half of the
conference attendees were from industry.

.. _2023 Bicycle and Motorcycle Dynamics Conference: https://2023.bmdconf.org

I was awarded a Chan-Zuckerberg Essential Open Source Software for Science
grant (350k EUR) with partners SymPy, Quantsight, and the University of Bristol
to build out the rider biomechanical modeling capabilities mentioned above. I
followed this with a 3mE cohesion grant (200k EUR) in collaboration with
multiple departments (Azita Dabiri (DCSC), Frederik Schulte (Maritime), and
Riender Happee (CoR)) to expand the use of the bicycle-rider models into micro
traffic simulation. Our first models of realistic bicycle behavior will be
incorporated into the German Aerospace Center's SUMO open source tool in the
coming year. Most recently, Holger Caeser (CoR) and I have received two grants
of 30k EUR and 100k EUR to study bicycle rider perception using Boreal Bikes'
LIDAR equipped instrumented bicycle.

Lastly, I want to create a research consortium of bicycle companies and TU
Delft researchers with the intent to identify common research needs across
industry which we can tackle for broad societal benefit. Hosting the conference
here at TU Delft, will be part of the catalyst for this.

Education
=========

As a driving theme, I want to further and apply the concepts of "computational
thinking" in my educational activities. Computational thinking can be defined
as the *thought processes involved in formulating problems so their solutions
can be represented as computational steps and algorithms* (Wikipeida 2023).
Reasoning through computational thinking provides learners a complementary
learning tool on par with natural language, visualizations, and mathematics. To
that end, I have developed three BSc (UCD) and three MSc courses (1 at UCD & 2
at TUD) where I have either built them entirely on the principals of
computational thinking or heavily woven it in. For example, in courses I lead
students in live coding exercises to explore and understand a new dynamics
concept. I have taught these six courses fifteen times to approximately 800
students.

.. _computational thinking: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computational_thinking

..
   EME 134, 2 times, 40 students per time
   EME 171, 3 times, 60 students per time
   ENG 122, 3 times, 25 students per time
   MAE 223, 2 times, 20 students per time
   ME41035, 3 times, 25 students per time
   ME41055, 2 times, 150 students per time

Here at TU Delft, I am currently developing and teaching two Master of Science
courses: "`Multibody Dynamics`_", a Mechanical Engineering MSc track core
course, and "`Special Topics in Sports Engineering`_", an elective. Multibody
Dynamics serves 150 students per year and Special Topics provides a two week 3
ECTS summer course for about 25 students per year from around The Netherlands
and Europe.

.. _Special Topics in Sports Engineering: https://moorepants.github.io/me41035/
.. _Multibody Dynamics: https://moorepants.github.io/me41055/

In Multibody Dynamics, I make use of active learning practices by providing a
series of lecture videos paired with in-person guided homework work sessions. I
wrote a 350 page open access online interactive computational oriented book,
`Learn Multibody Dynamics`_, for the course which is paired with a set of 12
computational homeworks including conceptual questions the students complete
each week as an optional portion of the final grade and to gain formative
feedback for the exam preparation.

.. _Learn Multibody Dynamics: https://moorepants.github.io/learn-multibody-dynamics/

Special Topics in Sports Engineering challenges internationally mixed student
groups to develop a computational predictive model for a cycling time trial
based on a series of interdisciplinary lectures assembled from sports
engineering experts around Europe. The lectures are paired with a series of
student designed experiments to develop the principles of mechanics, data
analyses, computation, and physiology to strengthen their models. I partner
with Sheffield-Hallam University, Aalborg University, Vrije Universiteit
Amsterdam, Technical University Vienna, and Chemnitz University of Technology
for this course. This course is a key offering for our Sports Engineering MSc
designation.

I have received personal positive feedback from students on the pedagogical
approaches of both courses, with particular appreciation of being able to solve
realistic problems at the course's end. As an assistant professor of teaching
in California, my student evaluations of teaching were consistently above
average. The number of students in Multibody Dynamics has increased by 30
students since last year. I see multibody dynamics remaining an important
foundational course for our MSc tracks that need to model and simulate
robotics, vehicles, mechanisms, musculoskeletal systems, etc. I hope in the
future to transform Special Topics in Sports Engineering into a full blown
bicycle engineering course that is unique in the world and increase the number
of students served by this hands-on approach to learning.

Organization Contributions
==========================

I currently serve on the Mechanical Engineering MSc Opleiding Commissie to help
provide feedback on curriculum improvements and address concerns from the
student organizations. I have participated in developing the updates to the 3mE
literature study rubric, provided materials to assist in developing the BME/BMD
MSc track guidance documents, and contributed to the department's accreditation
reporting process. Our department is working on growth and change and I chair
the transparency working group in that process. At the university level, I am
part of Delft Open Science, helping promote best practices, and work with the
library to pilot their open peer review journal publishing model. I now manage
the annual open source software installation process across all TU Delft
computer labs in collaboration with ICT and WPS. In the future, I hope to lead
and contribute to efforts for campus wide open source software offerings, much
like I did at the University of California, Davis.

Leadership
==========
..
   role as the leader of his/her own research group.

I firmly believe that a good leader focuses first and foremost on the people
they are leading. Building trust, camaraderie, equity, and joy in our shared
work sets the foundation to excel at our jobs and studies. I lead a research
group centered around the bicycle lab where I work to foster an inclusive and
participatory environment. I have established regular lab meetings, an
on-boarding process for students and staff alike, a collaboratively developed
lab guide, social events for our team, and a culture of collective teamwork
and shared responsibilities. My goal is to empower everyone involved in our
research and educational activities to take ownership and collectively drive
our mission while also meeting their personal goals.

Conclusion
==========

With the heavy effects of coronavirus now past, I believe I have established a
strong foundation for success here at TU Delft. I plan to lead a European
Commission Horizon proposal effort in 2024 with a large bicycle company. I am
leading a work package for an NWO Perspectief proposal to increase movement
with sports. I intend to target an NWO Open Technology Programs to further our
work in bicycle design to push performance in professional cycling sports and
to take the traffic simulation modeling cohesion project outside of the
simulation environment and into a living lab.  On the education front, I want
to formally publish my multibody dynamics book and then help others develop
similar teaching approaches and materials here at TU Delft. Lastly, I want to
have a lot of fun working on challenging research with my group and
collaborators so that we can make the world better with more bicycles and more
people riding them.

.. raw:: latex

   \newpage

References
==========

.. [Moore2011] J. K. Moore, J. D. G. Kooijman, A. L. Schwab, and M.  Hubbard,
   "Rider motion identification during normal bicycling by means of principal
   component analysis," Multibody Syst Dyn, vol. 25, no. 2, pp.  225–244, Feb.
   2011, doi: 10.1007/s11044-010-9225-8.
.. [Hess2012] R. Hess, J. K. Moore, and M. Hubbard, “Modeling the Manually
   Controlled Bicycle,” IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics -
   Part A: Systems and Humans, vol. 42, no. 3, pp. 545–557, Feb. 2012, doi:
   10.1109/TSMCA.2011.2164244.
.. [Moore2012] J. K. Moore, “Human Control of a Bicycle,” Doctor of Philosophy,
   University of California, Davis, CA, 2012. [Online]. Available:
   http://moorepants.github.io/dissertation
.. [Moore2015] J. K. Moore, S. K. Hnat, and A. J. van den Bogert, “An elaborate
   data set on human gait and the effect of mechanical perturbations,” PeerJ,
   vol. 3, no. e918, Apr. 2015, doi: 10.7717/peerj.918.
.. [Moore2015a] J. K. Moore and A. J. van den Bogert, “Quiet Standing Control
   Parameter Identification with Direct Collocation,” presented at the XV
   International Symposium on Computer Simulation in Biomechanics, XV
   International Symposium on Computer Simulation in Biomechanics: Edinburgh,
   UK, Jul. 09, 2015. [Online]. Available:
   https://github.com/csu-hmc/ISBTGCS2015
.. [Moore2016] J. K. Moore, M. Hubbard, and R. A. Hess, “An Optimal Handling
   Bicycle,” in Proceedings of the 2016 Bicycle and Motorcycle Dynamics
   Conference, Figshare, Sep. 2016. doi: 10.6084/m9.figshare.c.3460590.v11.
.. [Meurer2017] A. Meurer et al., “SymPy: symbolic computing in Python,” PeerJ
   Comput. Sci., vol. 3, no. e103, Jan. 2017, doi: 10.7717/peerj-cs.103.
.. [Moore2018] J. K. Moore and A. van den Bogert, “opty: Software for
   trajectory optimization and parameter identification using direct
   collocation,” Journal of Open Source Software, vol. 3, no. 21, p. 300, Jan.
   2018, doi: 10.21105/joss.00300.
.. [Cloud2019] B. Cloud et al., “Adaptive smartphone-based sensor fusion for
   estimating competitive rowing kinematic metrics,” PLOS ONE, vol. 14, no. 12,
   p. e0225690, Dec. 2019, doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0225690.
.. [Alizadehsaravi2023] L. Alizadehsaravi and J. K. Moore, “Bicycle balance
   assist system reduces roll and steering motion for young and older
   bicyclists during real-life safety challenges,” PeerJ, vol. 11, p. e16206,
   Oct. 2023, doi: 10.7717/peerj.16206.
.. [Schmidt2023] C. M. Schmidt, A. Dabiri, F. Schulte, R. Happee, and J. Moore,
   “Essential bicycle dynamics for microscopic traffic simulation: An example
   using the social force model,” presented at the Bicycle and Motorcycle
   Dynamics 2023, Delft, The Netherlands: TU Delft OPEN Publishing, 2023. doi:
   10.59490/65037d08763775ba4854da53.
.. [Steinstra2023] T. J. Stienstra, S. G. Brockie, and J. K. Moore, “BRiM: A
   modular bicycle-rider modeling framework,” presented at the Bicycle and
   Motorcycle Dynamics 2023, Delft, The Netherlands: TU Delft OPEN Publishing,
   Oct. 2023. doi: 10.59490/6504c5a765e8118fc7b106c3.
