..
   In the presentation the Tenure Track employee gives an overview of the
   results achieved in the field of education, research and valorization,
   his/her contribution to the organization, as well as a vision on leadership,
   (the developments in) his/her own field of study, his/her position within it
   and plans for the future.

Introduction
============

I joined TU Delft as an assistant professor on August 1, 2020 following five
years as an assistant professor of teaching at the University of California,
Davis in the USA. I came to TU Delft to pursue my dream of researching bicycle
engineering and teaching engineering dynamics. The Netherlands may be the only
place in the world, where this could come true. The joy of engineering drives
me and I desire to pass that feeling on to my students and colleagues.

Education
=========

I want to further and apply the concept of "computational thinking" in my
educational activities as a driving theme.

Computational thinking postulates that computation can
be used as a tool just as, and even equal to, natural language and mathematics
for reasoning about and learning technical concepts. Since the 1970s,
engineering courses have leveraged computation as a complementary tool, rather
than integral or necessary for learning.

In my career, I hope to apply
computational thinking as a foundational paradigm to give our future engineers
three equal pillars for solving the next generation societal problems.

To that end, I have designed five courses (3 UCD, 2 TUD) where I have either
built them entirely on the principals of computational thinking or woven it in
significantly. I have taught these five course twelve times to approximately
750 students. Here at TU Delft, I am currently developing and teaching two
Master of Science courses: "Special Topics in Sports Engineering", an elective,
and "Multibody Dynamics B", a Mechanical Engineering track core course. Both
courses 

"Special Topics in Sports Engineering" two about 30 students annually.

This is a 3 ETC intensive two week course where 20 TU Delft students team up
with visiting students from 6 participating univerisites around Europe. I
organize invited lectures and workshops on the principles of bicycling science
and engineering. The students are tasked with developing a computational time
trial predictive model backed by self-designed experiments throughout the two
weeks. The students work cross-disciplinary and cross-country teams to apply
the principles of mechanics, data analyses, computation, and phsiology to
compete for the best predictions at a final race in a local velodrome. I
co-instruct this course with Dr. John Hart from Sheffield-Hallam University.

"Multibody Dynamics B" is a choice for obligatory in the Mechanical Engineerin
masters track and now has 200 students.

Research
========

Societies around the globe must vastly replace the number of trips taken by car
with trips taken by bicycle to reduce transportation energy usage, reduce
pollution and global warming, improve the health of society, and increase
happiness. The Netherlands leads all other countries, by a large margin, in
bicycle mode share (27%), yet we are also a heavily car dependent nation. Most
countries have dismal bicycle use and developing countries are following in
wrong footsteps of North America and Europe. Bicycling is the most energy
efficient mode of transport and most car trips are under 15km. Stated simply,
these trips have to be changed to bicycling. As an American resident of the
Netherlands, I have a dual perspective of experience in one of the worst
developed countries for bicycling and the best.

Bicycle transporation research has skyrocketed in the last 20 years and TU
Delft has the world's only significant bicycle engineering labotoary, which I
now lead. My vision is to make significant conitributions to the wider adoption
of bicycling around the world by understanding how bicyclists interact with the
bicycle and the transportation enviroment. My mechanical and biomechanical
foundation begins with understanding of the bicycle-rider dynamic system, which
I categorize into four fundamental research areas: 1) vehicle dynamics, 2)
rider biomechanics, 3) rider neuromuscular control, and 4) bicycle-rider
behavior. I will use these fundmental pillars to develop innovations for the
vehicle that will make the bicycle the most attractive mode of transport for
the 21st century.

My unique strength is the combination of these four pillars. I am the only
researcher that is developing the theory of the rider's neuromuscular control
and using it to predict a bicyclist's behavior in the natural tranpsortation
system. I use a balanced combination of first principles modeling that are
driven by data generated from carefully designed experiments.

Valorization
============

My long term goal is to make TU Delft the world's hub for bicycle engineering
research and to broadly support society's needs for innovations in bicycle
technology. I currently work in close partnership with Royal Dutch Gazelle and
Bosch eBike Systems, Team DSM, ICTech, and Prinoth. I have been developing relationships with
SWOV, TeamNL (BMX), Tacx by Garmin, TrueKinetix, Swugo, Specialized, Trek, and Shimano. I
have worked with World Bicycle Relief (SRAM) and numerous startups (Swugo,
TrueKinetix, ICTech, German group). My short term goal is to create a research
consortium of bicycle companies and TU Delft researchers with the intent to
identify common research needs across companies which we can tackle for broad
benefit to the industry.

Contributions to the Organization
=================================

Besides my intention to support computionatl thinking across the university, I
serve on the Mechanical Engienering Olieding Comissie. I am part of the BMechE
committee for our accredeation. I also am part of Delft Open Science
Help the library pilot new publishing methods. Recess College

Vision on Leadership
====================

I firmly believe that a good leader focuses on the people they are leading
first and foremost. Building trust, camaraderie, equity, and joy in our shared
work sets the foundation to excel at what we do. I lead a research group
centered around the Bicycle Lab and play a leadership role in my broader
research community through conference, symposia, and workshop organization.
Being still relatively new at TU Delft, I have not yet taken on significant
leadership roles but that will come as I become more integrated and connected.

Developments in my field of study, position within it, and plans for the future
===============================================================================
